---
layout: post
title:  "Books"
date:   2015-01-22 12:00:00
---

I'd like to start keeping track of my favorite books. I could use Goodreads (I haven't logged in in quite a while), but I figured a blog post might also work well. I guess we'll see.

### Book Recommendations ###

#### Hal Abelson and Gerald Sussman: Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs ####

The best book on computing I've ever read. The best textbook I've ever owned.
It's concise but approachable; its exercises aren't just good, they're enlightening.
Every time you read it, you find something new to latch onto. It's [free](http://mitpress.mit.edu/sicp/).
If you're a programmer, you should read it. If you want to become a programmer, my recommendation is
to work through a more-introductory book (Maybe _Learn Python the Hard Way_), and then read this immediately
afterward.

#### Raymond Smullyan: The Tao is Silent ####

I have no particular gravitation toward the mystical or the religious. Accordingly,
The Tao is Silent is not for the kind of person who is in the habit of discovering
deep truths in religious texts; it's for people who think too much. It's a book about
religion for nerds. I laughed out loud more times per page while reading this book than
any book since I was 10 (which is saying something given that this estimate includes Douglas Adams).

#### Daniel Quinn: Ishmael ####

There's a certain way of thinking about humanity's future that I learned from _Ishmael_.
If I had a million dollars, I'd spend a significant portion of it sending copies of this book
to politicians and scientists.

#### Jack Kerouac: The Dharma Bums ####

Another book about spirituality that doesn't feel like it's about spirituality. It's just fun.
