---
layout: post
title: What the GTF Looks Like
date: September 6, 2022
location: Berkeley
---

Sometimes my friends talk about the "GTF": the Glorious Transhuman Future,
which we might one day create - whether in our lifetimes or our descendants'.
The GTF is like the anti-existential-risk. Sometimes it's referred to as an
"existential win". Many people have told me that they find this idea really
motivating: When they're feeling down or discouraged, they can conjure up
images of what the GTF might look like, and feel spurred on to do whatever it
is that needs to happen for humanity, or all conscious life, to thrive.

This visualization trick doesn't work for me. Whenever I try to think of the
GTF, my visions are always swallowed up by a voice saying "no, no, it won't
be like that, it will be even better!" And of course that voice is right! But
I can't imagine *how* it will be better. And I don't seem to have the
Parfitian sensitivity to the abstract that would allow me to really *feel*
the betterness in my bones.

Peter Eckersley died on Friday. For the 24 hours after his death, a bunch of
people undertook substantial heroics to ensure that his wishes about his
remains were enacted. In the end, they successfully caused his brain to be
vitrified by Alcor.

I wasn't close with Peter, though we'd met a few times. But since I learned
that the preservation of his brain was deemed a success, I've felt a new
sense of motivation. I can't say much about what the GTF might look like if
we achieve it, but I've finally got one concrete detail: I'd bet that Peter
will be there.
